feat: Explain React Router integration for Vaadin Flow (#3039)
vaadin/docs: articles/create-ui/templates/using-react.asciidoc

Author: For me, as Java and Vaadin developer, using a React is one more way of creating front-end views, i.e. fits into templates topic.
Adding it to "Start a Project" as one more tab looks weird, as Maven/Gradle cannot be grouped with Hilla and Hybrid apps, it's a different thing.
"Integrations" might be a good trade-off for now, when we have a separate docs for Hilla.

Author: Moved to "Integrations" with title "Hilla"

---
title: Use React library
description: How to create a hybrid Vaadin applications using React
order: 200
---

[role="since:com.vaadin:vaadin@V24.3"]

> = Vaadin Hybrid Applications With React

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Flow-Hilla Hybrid Applications
```

> Vaadin allows to develop a hybrid application that leverages Vaadin Flow, React, and the https://hilla.dev/docs/react[Hilla framework].
> This gives an opportunity to combine Vaadin Flow components and routes with the ones written in React in one single application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://hilla.dev/docs/react[Hilla] is a framework by Vaadin for building reactive web applications on Java backends. It seamlessly integrates a [React](https://reactjs.org/) TypeScript frontend with a [Spring Boot](https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot) backend.

You can develop hybrid applications that leverage Vaadin Flow and Hilla. This allows you to combine Vaadin Flow components and routes with the ones written in React in one single application.
```

> This section demonstrates how to create a hybrid application from the https://github.com/vaadin/skeleton-starter-hilla-react[React+Hilla application].

Reviewer: Can we provide the opposite: instructions for adding Hilla to existing Flow apps? This article will be mostly read by existing Flow developers who might be interested in adding Hilla to their existing Flow apps.

Reviewer 2: This should probably have 2 routes to choose from. `Add Flow to Hilla` and `Add Hilla to Flow`

Reviewer: We can have both. But `Add Hilla to Flow` is the more relevant path for the Flow docs IMO.

== Add Vaadin And Hilla Dependencies

Open your `pom.xml` file and add the necessary dependencies for Vaadin Flow:

> .Vaadin and Hilla versions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Added Vaadin bom
```
As the hilla version and bom should already exist as we are adding to a hilla project

[source,xml]
----
<properties>
    <java.version>17</java.version>
    <vaadin.version>24.3.0</vaadin.version>
    <hilla.version>2.4.0</hilla.version>
</properties>

<dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>com.vaadin</groupId>
            <artifactId>vaadin-bom</artifactId>
            <version>${vaadin.version}</version>
            <type>pom</type>
            <scope>import</scope>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>dev.hilla</groupId>
            <artifactId>hilla-bom</artifactId>
            <version>${hilla.version}</version>
            <type>pom</type>
            <scope>import</scope>
        </dependency>
        <!-- Other pom imports -->
    </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>
----

Add the `vaadin-core` / `vaadin` dependency:

> .Vaadin and Hilla dependencies

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Vaadin dependency
```
As this sample has no hilla dependencies.

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.vaadin</groupId>
    <!-- Replace artifactId with vaadin-core to use only free components -->
    <artifactId>vaadin</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

== Enable Feature Flag

React integration for Vaadin Flow is under development, and thus it is behind a feature flag at the moment.

Enable it by adding the following parameter into [filename]`src/main/resources/vaadin-featureflags.properties`:

.`vaadin-featureflags.properties`
[source,properties]
----
com.vaadin.experimental.reactRouter=true
----

> == Add the server-side routes entry

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Add Server-side Routes Target
```

Author: done

In the [filename]`frontend/routes.tsx` file, import and include the `serverSideRoutes` object:

.Import server-side routes
[source,javascript]
----
import {serverSideRoutes} from "Frontend/generated/flow/Flow";

// ...
export const routes = [
    // Hilla routes definitions
    ...serverSideRoutes
]
----

> .Import server-side routes for CRM tutorial

Reviewer 2: This should have some highlight that this is an **example** on the base CRM routes.tsx

Author: Reworded and added a link to CRM example.

[source,javascript]
----
import { serverSideRoutes } from "Frontend/generated/flow/Flow";
import MainLayout from 'Frontend/views/MainLayout';
import ContactsView from 'Frontend/views/ContactsView';
import AboutView from 'Frontend/views/AboutView';
import { RouteObject } from 'react-router-dom';

export const routes: RouteObject[] = [
    {
        element: <MainLayout />,
        handle: { title: 'Hilla CRM' },
        children: [
            { path: '/', element: <ContactsView />, handle: { title: 'Contacts' } },
            { path: '/about', element: <AboutView />, handle: { title: 'About' } },
            ...serverSideRoutes
        ],
    },
];
----

> Adding `serverSideRoutes` is crucial to let React Router navigate to server-side (Vaadin Flow) routes from React routes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding `serverSideRoutes` is required for React Router to be able to navigate to server-side (Vaadin Flow) routes.
```
A big point here is also that to navigate at all to server router using react router you need the serverSideRoutes

If this configuration is missed and the feature flag is enabled, Vaadin throws a runtime exception in build time.

.Route configuration and React dependencies
[NOTE]

> Vaadin creates [filename]`frontend/App.tsx` and [filename]`frontend/routes.tsx` files automatically, if they are missing, as well as internal `Frontend/generated/flow/Flow.tsx` file and adds React front-end dependencies, such as `react`, `react-dom` and `react-router-dom`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Vaadin creates [filename]`frontend/App.tsx` and [filename]`frontend/routes.tsx` files automatically, if they are missing, as well as the internal `Frontend/generated/flow/Flow.tsx` file. Also React dependencies, such as `react`, `react-dom` and `react-router-dom`, are added to the `package.json` file and installed.
```

Author: done

== Add Vaadin Flow routes

Add Vaadin Flow routes, as described in https://vaadin.com/docs/latest/routing/route[Routing & Navigation].

> 

Reviewer 2: Missing discussion-id
```[discussion-id]`Random UUID` ```

Author: added
